[Final Phase Blog] Git Plugin Performance Improvement (#3664)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2020/08/2020-08-29-git-performance-improvement-phase3.adoc

* Number of commits has a negligible effect on the performance of running git fetch

*After running these experiments from Stage-1 to Stage-3, we developed a solution called the `GitToolChooser` which is explained in the next stage*

=== Stage 4: Enabling faster checkouts with an automatic git tool chooser

This feature takes the responsibility of choosing the optimal implementation from the *user* and hands it to the *plugin*. It takes the decision of recommending an implementation on the basis of the size of the repository. link:/blog/2020/07/2020-07-29-git-performance-improvement-phase2.adoc[Here is how it works].

image:/images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/git-perf-improv.png[title="Faster checkouts with GitToolChooser" role="center", width=938]

The image above depicts the performance enhancements we have performed over the course of the GSoC project. These improvements have enabled the checkout step to be finished *within half of what it used to take* earlier in some cases.

Let's talk about performance improvements in two parts.

== Major Performance Improvements

> image:/images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/git-major-perf.png[Major performance enhancements, align='center', width=400]

Author: I was not able to set the alignment of the image to `center` in my local ascii viewer. What is the right way to do it?

Reviewer: I don't know how to do that.  You could try searching the other blogs on the jenkins.io site to see if you find one that has been able to center images.  Since the blog layout seems to have a fixed maximum width, I'm not sure you'll be pleased with centering the image.

Author: I think it looks okay judging by the screenshot you've posted.

---
layout: post
title: "Git Plugin Performance Improvement: Final Phase and Release"
tags:
- plugins
- git
- platform-sig
- developer
- performance
- gsoc
- gsoc2020
author: rishabhbudhouliya
opengraph:
  image: /images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/gsoc-git-opengraph.png
---

Since the beginning of the project, the core value which drove its progress was "To enhance the user experience for running Jenkins jobs by reducing the overall execution time".

To achieve this goal, we laid out a path: 

* Compare the two existing git implementations i.e CliGitAPIImpl and JGitAPIImpl using performance benchmarking
* Use the results to create a feature which would improve the overall performance of git plugin
* Also, fix existing user reported performance issues

> Let's take a journey to understand how we've build the new features. If you'd like to skip the journey part, you can directly skip to the end section to see what we've done!

Reviewer: Easier on the reader to provide a hyperlink to the destination of the "skip".
```suggestion
Let's take a journey to understand how we've built the new features.
If you'd like to skip the journey part, you can directly skip to the <<major performance improvements> section and the <<minor performance improvements>> section to see what we've done!
```

> == Journey to the release of Git Plugin 4.4.0 and Git Client Plugin 3.4.0

Reviewer: The long title wraps on the site when formatted on my wide monitor.  You might consider reducing the length of the title.
```suggestion
== Journey to release
```

The project started with deciding to choose a git operation and then trying to compare the performance of that operation by using `command line git` and then with `JGit`.

=== Stage 1: Benchmark results with git fetch

image:/images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/git-fetch-results.png[git-fetch-results, width=938]

* The performance of git fetch (average execution time/op) is strongly correlated to the size of a repository
* There exists an inflection point on the scale of repository size after which the nature of `JGit` performance changes (it starts to degrade)
* After running multiple benchmarks, it is safe to say that for a large sized repository `command line git` would be a better choice of implementation.

> * We can use this insight to implement a feature which avoids `JGit` when it comes to large repositories.

Reviewer: Possibly simpler phrasing?
```suggestion
* We can use this insight to implement a feature which avoids `JGit` with large repositories.
```

> === Stage 2: Validate the benchmark results across multiple platforms

Reviewer: I prefer single line headings as easier for me to read and navigate
```suggestion
=== Stage 2: Comparing platforms
```

> 
> Running git fetch operation for a 400 MiB sized repository on:

Reviewer: Needs an introductory paragraph to describe why the project was concerned about platform dependencies.
```suggestion
The project was also concerned that there might be important differences between operating systems.
For example, what if command line Git for Windows performed very differently than command line Git on Linux or FreeBSD?

Benchmarks were run to compare fetch performance on several platforms.
Running git fetch operation for a 400 MiB sized repository on:
```

> * `Windows`
> * `FreeBSD-12`
> * `ppc64le`
> * `s390x`

Reviewer: Processor and operating system were both a concern here.  I think we should list both the processor and the operating system
```suggestion
* AMD64 Microsoft Winders
* AMD64 FreeBSD
* IBM PowerPC 64 LE Ubuntu 18
* IBM System 390 Ubuntu 18
```

The result of running this experiment is given below:

image:/images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/git-multiple-platforms.png[Performance on multiple platforms]

> *Observation*: The difference in performance between `git` and `JGit` remains constant across all platforms which means any insight taken from the benchmarks to develop a solution will be platform agnostic in general.

Reviewer: Asciidoc has the concept of a "NOTE" that provides a way to highlight text as specially important.  Note required to use it, but you might consider it
```suggestion
NOTE: The difference in performance between `git` and `JGit` remains constant across all platforms.
Benchmark results on one platform are applicable to all platforms.
```

=== Stage 3: Performance of git fetch and repository structure

image:/images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/git-repo-diagram.png[title="Relationship of repository structure with performance" role="center", width=420]

The area of the circle enclosing each parameter signifies the strength of the positive correlation between the performance of a git fetch operation and that parameter. From the diagram: +

* Size of the aggregated objects is the *dominant* player in determining the execution time for a git fetch
* Number of branches and Number of tags play a similar role but are strongly overshadowed by size of repository
* Number of commits has a negligible effect on the performance of running git fetch

*After running these experiments from Stage-1 to Stage-3, we developed a solution called the `GitToolChooser` which is explained in the next stage*

> === Stage 4: Enabling faster checkouts with an automatic git tool chooser

Reviewer: Another change to avoid text wrapping the headings
```suggestion
=== Stage 4: Faster checkout with Git tool chooser
```

> This feature takes the responsibility of choosing the optimal implementation from the *user* and hands it to the *plugin*. It takes the decision of recommending an implementation on the basis of the size of the repository. link:/blog/2020/07/2020-07-29-git-performance-improvement-phase2.adoc[Here is how it works].

Reviewer: Fix the broken link
```suggestion
This feature takes the responsibility of choosing the optimal implementation from the *user* and hands it to the *plugin*. It takes the decision of recommending an implementation on the basis of the size of the repository. link:/blog/2020/07/29/git-performance-improvement-phase2/[Here is how it works].
```

image:/images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/git-perf-improv.png[title="Faster checkouts with GitToolChooser" role="center", width=938]

The image above depicts the performance enhancements we have performed over the course of the GSoC project. These improvements have enabled the checkout step to be finished *within half of what it used to take* earlier in some cases.

Let's talk about performance improvements in two parts.

> == Major Performance Improvements

Reviewer: The preceding headings are using "sentence case" (capitalize first word, rest lower case).  Make this sentence case as well.
```suggestion
== Major performance improvements
```

image:/images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/git-major-perf.png[Major performance enhancements, align='center', width=400]

Building Tensorflow (~800 MiB) using a Jenkins pipeline, there is over 50% reduction in overall time spent in completing a job! 
The result is consistent multiple platforms.

The reason for such a decrease is the fact that `JGit` degrades in performance when we are talking about large sized repositories. Since the GitToolChooser is aware of this fact, it chooses to recommend `command line git` instead which saves the user some time.

> == Minor Performance Improvements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Minor performance improvements
```

*Note: Enable JGit before using the new performance features to let GitToolChooser work with more options* -> link:https://plugins.jenkins.io/git-client/#enabling-jgit[Here's how]

image:/images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/git-minor-perf.png[title="Minor performance enhancements" role="center", width=400]

Building the git plugin (~ 20 MiB) using a Jenkins pipeline, there is a drop of a *second* across all platforms when performance enhancement is enabled. Also, eliminating a redundant fetch reduces unnecessary load on git servers.

The reason for this change is the fact that `JGit` performs better than `command line git` for small sized repositories (<50MiB) as an already warmed up JVM favors the native Java implementation.

> == Release

Reviewer: Since there were multiple releases, seems safe to make the heading plural as "Releases" rather than singular "Release"
```suggestion
== Releases
```

> * Git Plugin 4.4.0 -> https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-plugin/releases/tag/git-4.4.0

Reviewer: Hyperlink the text rather than showing the full link to the user
```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-plugin/releases/tag/git-4.4.0[Git Plugin 4.4.0]
```

  ** Add GitToolChooser
  ** Remove redundant fetch

> * Git Client Plugin 3.4.0 -> https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-client-plugin/releases/tag/git-client-3.4.0

Reviewer: Hyperlink here as well.
```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-client-plugin/releases/tag/git-client-3.4.0[Git Client Plugin 3.4.0]
```

  ** Add support to communicate compatibility of JGit with certain additional SCM behaviors

> == The Road Ahead

Reviewer: Sentence case in this heading to be consistent with the rest of the blog post
```suggestion
== The road ahead
```

* Support from other branch source plugins
  ** Plugins like the GitHub Branch Source Plugin or GitLab Branch Source Plugin need to extend an extension point provided by the git plugin to facilitate the exchange of information related to size of a remote repository hosted by the particular git provider

> * JENKINS-63519: GitToolChooser predicts the wrong implementation

Reviewer: Link to the bug report if mentioning a bug report.
```suggestion
* link:https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/browse/JENKINS-63519[JENKINS-63519]: GitToolChooser predicts the wrong implementation
```

* Addition of this feature to GitSCMSource
* Detection of lock related delays accessing the cache directories present on the controller
  ** This issue was reported by the plugin maintainer Mark Waite, there is a need to reproduce the issue first and then find a possible solution.

== Reaching out

Feel free to reach out to us for any questions or feedback on the project's
link:https://gitter.im/jenkinsci/git-plugin[Gitter Channel] or the
mailto:jenkinsci-dev@googlegroups.com[Jenkins Developer Mailing list].
Report an issue at Jenkins link:https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/[Jira].

== Useful Links

> * Phase 1 Blog: https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/07/09/git-performance-improvement-phase1/
> * Phase 2 Blog: https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/07/29/git-performance-improvement-phase2/
> * Project Page: https://www.jenkins.io/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/git-plugin-performance/
> * Final Demo Presentation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sEqK4dAFg4s&feature=youtu.be

Reviewer: Embed the video into the blog post so that it is immediately visible as a video.  Link to the other posts rather than making the links visible

```suggestion
== Useful links

* link:/blog/2020/07/09/git-performance-improvement-phase1/[Phase 1 Blog]
* link:/blog/2020/07/29/git-performance-improvement-phase2/[Phase 2 Blog]
* link:/projects/gsoc/2020/projects/git-plugin-performance/[Project Page]

=== Demonstration

video::sEqK4dAFg4s[youtube,width=800,height=420]
```
